---
layouts: post page
title: Basics of CPU
---

### Common known CPU architectures
* 32-bit(x-86)    // used on desktop and latptop
* 64-bit(x-64_86) // used on desktop and latptop
* ARM   // used on mobile
* MIPS  //used on embedded devices

### Registers
`x86 family`
8086, 80386(32-bit architecture, also called i386) and AMD's Opteron(64-bit architecture).
These CPUs are backward compatible like 32-bit binary can be executed on a 64-bit platform.

#### General Purpose Registers
`16-bit` Intel 8086 GPRs:-
* Accumulator Register (AX)
* Base Register (BX)
* Counter Register (CX)
* Data Register (DX)
* Stack Pointer Register (SP)
* Stack Base Pointer Register (BP)
* Source Index Register (SI)
* Destination Index Register (DI)
* Instruction Pointer Register (IP)
<p class="message">
AX = AH and AL <br/>
BX = BH and BL <br/>
CX = CH and CL <br/>
DX = DH and DL <br/>
</p>

`32-bit` architecture GPRs:-
\
Here E stands for *Extended*
<p class="message">
EAX, EBX, ECX, EDX, ESP, EBP, ESI, EDI and EIP
</p>

`64-bit` architecture GPRs:-
\
Size of registers are twice tht of `32-bit`. Here R stands for *Register*
<p class="message">
RAX, RBX, RCX, RDX, RSP, RBP, RSI, RDI and RIP
<br/>
R8, R9, R10, R11, R12, R13, R14 and R15
</p>
Volatile Registers(values get lost when another function is called) :- R8, R9, R10 and R11
\
Values in the registers R12, R13, R14 and R15 are saved beore calling another function

__Passing values__
8-bit, 16-bit and 32-bit uses stck to pass arguments to a function
\
In 64-bit variant, few arguments are stored in registers *(RCX, RDX, R8 and R9)* and remanining arguments are pushed on the stack.

#### Segment Registers
The purpose of these registers is to store the value of the segments of the binary which is being executed.
Nowadays, these registers are not always used, the reason behind is that now the memory is not accessed *flat* but via *paging*

* *Code Segment Register (CS)* :- contains the value of the code segment
* *Data Segment Register (DS)* :- contains the value of the data segment
* *Extra Segment Register (ES, FS nd GS)* :- these are filled with data from OS such s exception or thread handling
* *Stack Segment Register (SS)* :- contains the value of the stack segment

### Endianess
###### Big Endian \
The big end of the data is read first.
ex:- abcd  // ascii value of a = 0x61, b = 0x62, c = 0x63, d = 0x64
\
So in Big Endian Notation ("abcd") is written as *0x61626364* as a hexadecimal value.
###### Little Endian \
Reverse of Big Endian (least significant byte at lowest address) \
So in Little Endian Notation ("abcd") is written as
*0x64636261* as a hexadecimal value.

##### Flags
Flags are not much helpful except some in reverse engineering.
